---
title: \[Spatial Interpolation Theory\] Ch 2. Properties of Random Fields
categories: [Advanced]
tags: [Random Field, Interpolation, Spatial Data]
excerpt: Preliminary about linear prediction
sidebar:
  - title: "Advanced Statistical Theory"
    image: /assets/img/Advanced.png
    image_alt: "image"
    nav: Advanced
author_profile: False
---

 The whole contents of \[Spatial Interpolation Theory\] series are from the text book 'Michael L. Stein, *Interpolation of Spatial Data*, New York: Springer, 1999.'





## 2.1 The basic Assumption of Random Fields

 The random fields is a generalization version of stochastic process. Remark that ordinary stochastic process is a sequence of random variables such as $\{Z(t): t\in \mathbb{R}\}$. Usually, the "t" means time point or processing index. The random fields are defined as set of random variables $\{Z(x) : x \in \mathbb{R}^d \}$. Usually, we want to predict $Z(x_0)$ using $Z(x_1),Z(x_2),...,Z(x_n)$. 



To make the inference about random fields, we define special statistical assets. 

>**Mean Function** : $$m(\textbf{x}) = E(Z(\textbf{x}))$$
>
>**Mean Vector :** $$\textbf{m} = \{m(\textbf{x}_i)\}_{i=1}^n$$
>
>**Covariance Function**: $$k(\textbf{x},\textbf{y}) = Cov(Z(\textbf{x}),Z(\textbf{y}))$$
>
>**Covariance Matrix : ** $\textbf{K} = \{k(\textbf{x}_i,\textbf{x}_j)\}_{i,j=1}^n$

We can build Hilbert Space using the kernel matrix and mean vector. 

$$\def\bf#1{\textbf{#1}}$$

To make the inference about real world, people usually add assumption to make it tractable. 

One of the assumption is Stationarity. The strong stationarity is defined as follow. 

> **Strong Stationarity**
>
> $$Z(\bf x)$$ is said to be strongly stationary if for any finite $$n \in \mathbb{R}, \bf{x}, \bf{x}_1,\bf{x}_2,...,\bf{x}_n \in \mathbb{R}^d,t_1,t_2,...,t_n \in \mathbb{R}$$,
>
> $$Pr(Z(\bf{x}_1 + \bf{x}) \leq t_1,Z(\bf{x}_2 + \bf{x}) \leq t_2, ..., Z(\bf{x}_n + \bf{x}) \leq t_n) = Pr(Z(\bf{x}_1 )\leq t_1,Z(\bf{x}_2 ) \leq t_2, ..., Z(\bf{x}_n ) \leq t_n)$$ 

Notice that, $$Pr(Z(\bf{x}) \leq t) = F(Z(\bf{x}))$$ is Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) and CDF is uniquely defined for each random variable. Therefore, for $$n=1$$, $$Pr(Z(\bf{x}_1 + \bf{x}) \leq t_1 ) = Pr(Z(\bf{x}_1))$$ is $$F(Z(\bf {x}_1 + \bf{x})) = F(Z(\bf{x}_1))$$ which means transformation invariance property. 

